Create SOP for knative_up != 1 (#2272)
openshift-knative/serverless-operator: docs/sops/serverless-controller-knative-up.md

> # OpenShift Serverless Knative Serving Control Plane Readiness

Reviewer: Are you planning to add anything for Eventing too?

Author: Not right now. This SOP is needed for RHODS, but they don't use Eventing.

## Severity: Critical

## Impact

Any users or services using Knative Serving will be unable to get their Knative Services reconciled.
This means, any new Knative Services might not be created, and any existing Knative Services might not be updated. Also, it might also mean that the user workload is not being served.

## Summary

OpenShift Serverless does not create any alerts out-of-the box. However, users can create alerts based on the metrics exposed.

> The metric `knative_up{namespace="openshift-serverless", type="serving_status"}` should always have a value of `1`. 

Reviewer: Actually for gauges it is better to measure it over some period of time eg. https://www.robustperception.io/alerting-on-gauges-in-prometheus-2-0/.

Author: Thanks for the great input @skonto !

`avg_over_time(up{job="jobname"}[5m]) < 0.9` we should use this kind of structure in https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVCOM-2704

Author: Also updated the text here to reflect that `knative_up` is a gauge and consumers should measure it over period of time. However, we don't provide alerts in this PR. That's part of SRVCOM-2704.

> OpenShift Serverless does not create any alerts out-of-the box. However, users can create alerts based on the metrics exposed.
> 
> The metric `knative_up{namespace="openshift-serverless", type="serving_status"}` should always have a value of `1`. 

Author: ```suggestion
OpenShift Serverless does not create any alerts out-of-the box. However, users can create alerts based on the gauges and metrics exposed.

The gauge `knative_up{namespace="openshift-serverless", type="serving_status"}` should always have a value of `1`.  You should create an alert as described in https://www.robustperception.io/alerting-on-gauges-in-prometheus-2-0/ for using this gauge and measure it over some period of time.
```

This failure should only occur in extremely catastrophic scenarios as all components are deployed in HA configuration.

Possible causes can be:
- Network issues in the cluster
- Resource starvation on the cluster
- OpenShift Serverless upgrade issues

You should check the control plane status of OpenShift Serverless operator, Knative Serving and the used Knative Serving Ingress.

## Prerequisites

1. You must have admin access to the cluster via `oc` CLI.

2. You must find out which Knative Serving Ingress is used.

Run the following command to see the Knative Serving spec's ingress related section:

```shell
$ k get knativeserving -n knative-serving knative-serving -o jsonpath='{.spec.ingress}'
```

If the output is empty, then Kourier is used as the Knative Serving Ingress. 

If the output is not empty, check which Ingress is used by looking at which ingress has `enabled: true`:

```yaml
  contour:
    enabled: false
  istio:
    enabled: true
  kourier:
    enabled: false
```

> In this case, Istio is used as the Knative Serving Ingress.

Reviewer: Probably we should mention that we use ServiceMesh and people should also check their setup there for issues.

Author: I will make some adjustments to the text here.

Author: I mentioned ServiceMesh too now.

>  people should also check their setup there for issues
This is already written in step 11 below

## Steps

1. Check to see if all the pods are running in `openshift-serverless` namespace:

```bash
$ oc -n openshift-serverless get pods
```

> 2. If they are not running, look at the pod's logs/events to see what may be causing the issues. Please make sure to grab the logs/events so they can be shared with the engineering team later:

Reviewer: Maybe for events and particular pods this is more focused:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/51931113/kubectl-get-events-only-for-a-pod

Author: I followed existing SOPs and use them as template.

I think it is a good idea to keep this instruction more generic. We already give instructions in the sections above for collecting events and logs.

Reviewer: Ok sure.

```bash
$ oc -n knative-serving-ingress get pods -l 'app in (3scale-kourier-gateway, net-kourier-controller)'
```

9. If they are not running, look at the pod's logs/events to see what may be causing the issues. Please make sure to grab the logs/events so they can be shared with the engineering team later:

```bash
# Check pod logs 
$ oc -n knative-serving-ingress logs -l 'app in (3scale-kourier-gateway, net-kourier-controller)' --prefix=true

# Check events 
$ oc -n knative-serving-ingress get events | grep pod

# Check pod status fields
$ oc -n knative-serving-ingress get pods -l 'app in (3scale-kourier-gateway, net-kourier-controller)' -o jsonpath="{range .items[*]}{.status}{\"\n\n\"}{end}"
```

10. Redeploy Knative Serving Ingress controllers by restarting the deployments:

```bash
$ oc -n knative-serving-ingress rollout restart deployments -l app.kubernetes.io/component=net-kourier
```

This should result in new pods getting deployed, attempt step (8) again and see if the pods achieve running state.

11. If Istio is used as the Knative Serving Ingress, check Istio status. You may find the SOPs for Istio by contacting Istio support. 

> 12. If the problem persists, capture the logs and escalate to OpenShift Serverless engineering team with a Knative ["must-gather"](https://github.com/openshift-knative/must-gather) dump.

Reviewer: Could you add the command here:

```oc adm must-gather --image=registry.redhat.io/openshift-serverless-1/svls-must-gather-rhel8 ```

That is the image I see people use. Not sure if there is a difference compared to quay.io/openshift-knative/must-gather.

Also it would be useful to add the SM one.

Reviewer: I think SM uses `registry.redhat.io/openshift-service-mesh/istio-must-gather-rhel8:2.4.0` but needs verification.

Author: Removed the mention to must gather.

Reviewer: They could also reach support or some contact?

Author: Good feedback, thanks. Let me find some links to put in here :)

Author: @skonto added some links about how to reach out to SM team.
(I've asked in Istio team channel)

> # OpenShift Serverless Knative Serving Control Plane Readiness

Reviewer 2: This seems like it is targeting only the operator pods. So that is not really "Serving", right? 
For Serving we'd also need to look at all pods in `knative-serving`, `knative-serving-ingress` and (when istio is used) `istio-system` (or a custom namespace where istio is deployed).

Author: Down in the file, there are instructions to check if pods in `knative-serving` is running.

But, let me add the same thing for other namespaces.

Thanks

Author: Added some text for Ingress now.

Thanks @ReToCode for the suggestion.

## Severity: Critical

## Impact

Any users or services using Knative Serving will be unable to get their Knative Services reconciled.
This means, any new Knative Services might not be created, and any existing Knative Services might not be updated. Also, it might also mean that the user workload is not being served.

## Summary

OpenShift Serverless does not create any alerts out-of-the box. However, users can create alerts based on the metrics exposed.

> The metric `knative_up{namespace="openshift-serverless", type="serving_status"}` should always have a value of `1`. 

Reviewer 3: I would personally create a simple list of alerts (in this repo?) that users can create so that here we can refer it also by name

Author: Good idea @danielezonca !

I've created a ticket for that now: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVCOM-2707

I think that's a separate issue/work.

This failure should only occur in extremely catastrophic scenarios as all components are deployed in HA configuration.

Possible causes can be:
- Network issues in the cluster
- Resource starvation on the cluster
- OpenShift Serverless upgrade issues

You should check both OpenShift Serverless operator and Knative Serving control plane status.

> ## Steps

Reviewer 3: Let's add a "Prerequisite" sections, in this case I expect it is enough to have the cluster and a `oc` client logged in but it is a good template to follow

Author: I copy pasted the ModelServing SOP in the private SRE repo and used it as the template, but let me add a pre-reqs section. It is a good idea.

1. Check to see if all the pods are running in `openshift-serverless` namespace:

```bash
$ oc -n openshift-serverless get pods

> ```

Reviewer 3: I would make this explicit: if the goal is to get all pods that are not running make the command already filter out only them like `--field-selector status.phase!=Running`

The reason of this comment is that this procedure should be as much as possible simple, for example if the command is going to return a lot of pods you might risk to don't see one of them not running

Author: I would prefer showing all pods.

Reason:
- Later on, there's an instruction to collect logs from pods. The `oc logs` command doesn't support something like "only logs of failing/unready/crashing pods" (it doesn't make sense to only collect the logs of those anyway. IMO, logs of the whole system should be collected)
- So, the person will collect the logs will see all logs, but they will see new pods that they haven't seen before.

We don't have too many pods anyway.

Also, the SOP I've used as a basis checks all logs, and not only the failing ones.

If one day and SRE comes and says we need to go this route, I can do it. I feel it is a bit of premature optimization at this point.

> 2. If they are not running, look at the pod's logs/events to see what may be causing the issues. Please make sure to grab the logs/events so they can be shared with the engineering team later:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure aware of the target audience for a SOP, but I'd assume that anyone operating the cluster already knows how to do to this? Would it be sufficient to just list which pods to take a look at, similar to 
https://knative.dev/docs/install/troubleshooting/

Reviewer 4: I like that idea from upstream, instead of doing too much of an introduction, which can be assumed as known (I guess)

Author: I've followed the SOPs in SRE repository in managed tenants. I would prefer keeping this format. It is them who is going to use the SOPs.

```bash

> # Get Pod names as we don't have a common label

Reviewer 4: should we introduce such a label? (wondering about this being scriptable)

Author: Created https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVCOM-2703

> $ SERVERLESS_OPERATOR_POD_NAMES_STR=$(oc -n openshift-serverless get pods --template '{{range .items}}{{.metadata.name}}{{" "}}{{end}}')

Author: Same as https://github.com/openshift-knative/serverless-operator/pull/2272#discussion_r1332718317

$ SERVERLESS_OPERATOR_POD_NAMES=($(echo "$SERVERLESS_OPERATOR_POD_NAMES_STR" | tr ' ' '\n'))

# Check pod logs
$ for element in "${SERVERLESS_OPERATOR_POD_NAMES[@]}"
$ do
$     oc -n openshift-serverless logs "$element" --prefix=true
$ done

# Check events 

> $ oc -n openshift-serverless get events

Author: I do not have that information right now.
Once we have it under operation, we can add some known events gradually.

# Check pod status fields
$ oc -n openshift-serverless get pods -o jsonpath="{range .items[*]}{.status}{\"\n\n\"}{end}"
```

3. Redeploy any failing controllers by restarting the deployments:

```bash
$ oc -n openshift-serverless rollout restart deployments/knative-openshift
$ oc -n openshift-serverless rollout restart deployments/knative-openshift-ingress
$ oc -n openshift-serverless rollout restart deployments/knative-operator-webhook
```

This should result in new pods getting deployed, attempt step (1) again and see if the pods achieve running state.

5. Check to see if all the pods are running in `knative-serving` namespace:

```bash

> $ oc -n knative-serving get pods -l app.kubernetes.io/name=knative-serving

Reviewer 3: Same as above

``` 

6. If they are not running, look at the pod's logs/events to see what may be causing the issues. Please make sure to grab the logs/events so they can be shared with the engineering team later:

```bash
# Check pod logs 
$ oc -n knative-serving logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=knative-serving --prefix=true

# Check events 
$ oc -n knative-serving get events | grep pod

# Check pod status fields
$ oc -n knative-serving get pods -l app.kubernetes.io/name=knative-serving -o jsonpath="{range .items[*]}{.status}{\"\n\n\"}{end}"
```

7. Redeploy Knative Serving controllers by restarting the deployments:

```bash
$ oc -n knative-serving rollout restart deployments -l app.kubernetes.io/name=knative-serving
```

This should result in new pods getting deployed, attempt step (5) again and see if the pods achieve running state.

> 8. If the problem persists, capture the logs and escalate to OpenShift Serverless engineering team.

Reviewer 2: Yes, although a non-knative specific must-gather would help as well.

> 8. If the problem persists, capture the logs and escalate to OpenShift Serverless engineering team.

Author: The idea to escalate to the engineering team with the _logs_. 
Then if eng team asks for a must-gather after checking the collected logs, SREs can do it.

So, IMO, let's not add it here.
